---
layout: post
title: Rock Star Programmers
---
A few years back when I was working on [AltLaw](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AltLaw), [Stuart Sierra](http://stuartsierra.com/), the project's leader and quasi-mentor to the team of interns gave us a schpeel on what he described as "rock star" programmers – programmers who didn't just specialize in lisp or Java or C, but who had a really wide breadth of skill and experience (without necessarily sacrificing too much expertise).

The idea really appealed to my youngster self (note the irony in referring to the me from 2-3 years ago as a "youngster"). Now that I'm a wee bit older and a wee bit wiser, I've rethought my position on the subject. I haven't really changed my mind, I just no longer think it's a special enough quality to earn the distinction of "rock star", at least not in exactly the way I remember it defined to me (mentioning mostly to not make it appear like I'm necessarily criticizing Stuart's definition – just rethinking what I took away from it.) Specifically, I'm harping on the fact that Stuart mentioned knowing different languages. If you're into web development, and you develop kernel drivers, and you publish algorithms, then perhaps you deserve the distinction of "rock star". But there doesn't seem anything "rock star"-ish about knowing more than one programming language. In fact, it seems kind of essential.

[Steve Yegee](http://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/) put it really well in an [old blog post](http://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/) he wrote that I stumbled upon on hacker news a week or two ago:

> an "X programmer", for any value of X, is a weak player

Writing good, sane code is kind of hard to do with just one technology under your belt, especially in things like web development. If you want to build a website, or even help build part of a website, to do a really good job, you need to have experience with, HTML and CSS (obviously), Javascript, and probably some server side technology and a language to go with it (ruby and something rack based, C# and ASP.NET, node, PHP, whatever else). You should understand what layouts are and why/how to use them. You should probably have a pretty good understanding of HTTP and REST. You should know how to write good Javascript and how to use Javascript libraries from the ones that improve basic functionality (jQuery, prototype) to fancy ones that draw graphs and do cool animations and whatever else. I might be able to go on, but the point is, one language/technology/skillset won't really cut it. Even if you end up not needing some or even most of this stuff, you have to be prepared with knowledge of it so that you can react with the proper solutions to problems that arise in the course of the development of whatever it is you're building.

The same idea, while perhaps slightly less applicable, goes for all kinds of programming. If you're a Java kid and you know your Java really well and you've got all the Java libraries that have ever existed memorized, well then great, you're a good Java programmer. But that doesn't make you a terribly good problem solver. "If all you've got is a hammer, everything looks like a nail." If someone puts a problem in front of you and you immediately make the unconscious decision to use Java because it's all you know, it's likely you've already made a mistake.
