---
layout: post
title: How RSA Works
listed: false
...

Alice wants to send a secret message to Carol. Alice asks Carol to generate a
pair of RSA keys, a private key and a public key. Carol then sends the public
key to Alice and keeps the private key on her own computer. Alice uses the
public key to encrypt the secret message, and then sends it along to Carol.
Once Carol gets the message, she can use the private key that she kept to
decrypt it and read Alice's message. Now, let's say Eve has been watching the
information that Alice and Carol transmit to each other. If Eve got a hold of
the encrypted version of the message, she wouldn't be able to read it.

But, remember that Carol had also sent the public key to Alice. What if Eve
had both the public key, which Carol used to encrypt the message, and the
encrypted message itself?

What's really cool about RSA is that even with both of those, Eve still
wouldn't be able to read the message. This feels counter-intuitive: Carol
takes her message, encrypts it with Alice's public key, but Carol herself
cannot decrypt the message she just encrypted. Only Alice, using her private
key.

How does this work?

---

Procedurally, this is how you perform RSA:

Let's say our original message can be represented as some number M. We want
to be able to encrypt M by raising it to some power e, and take it's
remainder mod some other number n. This gives us some number C as our
encrypted ciphertext.

\\[ C \equiv M^e \mod{n} \\]

To decrypt, we want to have some third number d, so that raising C to the d
mod n gives us back our original message:

$$ C^d \equiv M \mod{n} $$

This means that:

$$
\begin{align}
    (M^e)^d &\equiv M \mod{n} \\
    M^{ed} &\equiv M \mod{n}
\end{align}
$$

The trick is now finding values for e, d, and n so that this equation holds.

...

Or, to put it another way, we need to find a $d$ such that $(M^e)^d \mod{n} \equiv M$, or just $M^{ed} \mod{n} = M$. How do we do this? Well, it involves some kind of complicated math, but, for now, it can suffice to say that in order to find out what this $d$ is, we need to compute what's called the totient of $n$. The totient of $n$ is just the amount of numbers less than or equal to $n$ that are coprime to it. Ie, the amount of numbers less than or equal to $n$ that share no factors (other than 1) with $n$. So, we can compute the totient, and then use that to find a $d$ exponent that matches our $e$ exponent.

But this hasn't really solved much. If, given $e$ and $n$, we can compute what the totient of $n$ is, then so can someone else who gets their hands on the public key (which is basically just $e$ and $n$). A possible solution would be to make $n$ so big that it would take far too much time to compute the totient. Well, we could do that, but then we would have just as much difficulty computing the totient to generate the keys. The algorithm needs some kind of edge over people who have the public key, a way that it can compute the totient of $n$ efficiently and others cannot. Well, instead of just picking some big number for $n$, we could pick a big _prime_ number for $n$. We know that the totient of a prime number is just one less than itself (because if a number is prime, it has absolutely no factors, so it can't share any factors with numbers less than it, but we don't count the number 1, so we can use this fact to quickly “compute” the totient. This is a minor improvement, but not really, because all that someone needs to do is determine that the the number $n$ is prime, and then they can crack the encryption. Now, finding out if a very big number is prime can't be done too efficiently, but it only needs to be done once, and then people might say “aha, they're just always using prime numbers for $n$.” And then everyone would know that the totient of $n$ is always $n-1$. This is also doesn't work if your algorithm is ever made public. So this edge still isn't good enough.
    
So, what if, instead of using a prime number for $n$, we use the product of two primes numbers $p$ and $q$. The totient of $pq$ is just $pq - p - q + 1 = (p-1)(q-1)$. (If a prime number has no numbers less than it that is is coprime with, then the product of two primes is almost the same, except that it is coprime with $p$, $2p$, $3p$, $4p$, ... ,$(q-1)p$, $qp$, and with $q$, $2q$, $3q$, ... , $(p-1)q$, $pq$. So there are $q + p$ numbers that it is coprime with, but one of them is the same, so this leaves us with the totient being $pq - (p + q - 1) = pq - p - q + 1 = (p-1)(q-1)$). Using this fact, the key generation program can generate two primes $p$ and $q$, set $n = pq$, and then easily compute the totient as $(p-1)(q-1)$. The two prime numbers are then thrown away for good. Now, if someone wanted to crack the encryption, they would have to find out which two prime numbers $p$ and $q$ were originally multiplied to get $n$. For big enough values for $n$, this can't be done in a reasonable amount of time (even though the key generation program can compute it almost instantly, as it knows what $p$ and $q$ are). And there, our encryption is safe. Even if someone gets their hands on the public key, they still woudn't be able to crack the encrypted message.
