---
layout: post
title: Hackathon '11
---
I just experienced my first facebook hackathon. It didn't go exactly like I anticipated - but it was definitely an interesting experience. I learned a few things, but mostly about what happens to me when I don't get sleep and how I react to caffeine, not about programming. The type of work that goes on during a hackathon is admittedly a pretty big weakness of mine. I'd like to think that I'm a pretty good programmer and a decent computer scientist, especially for my age. But a lot of my skill feels like it's only "in theory", in that I have trouble shipping.

My difficulty in getting things done is not new. It's actually been going on for almost as long as I've been programming. I remember trying to make games when I was in 7th grade and getting furiously angry when I'd lose interest in them. Programming (or maybe more accurately "hacking", as much as I hate the word), is something that gives me a lot of joy at times. It's something I've devoted a large chunk of my life to. Hell, my college search (perhaps misguidedly) had essentially one criterion: a strong computer science department. All of this makes the times where I lose interest in projects all the more painful. Math is something else that I'm interested in, but when I lose interest in it from time to time, I just shrug it off, because math isn't that big a part of my life. But computer science is.

I was actually looking forward to the hackathon as a chance to fix the issues I have with staying devoted to projects. But instead of changing anything, the hackathon brought up all the same emotions -- the excitement and joy at a project's inception, the gradual boredom and loss of interest, the occasional resurfacing of interest, the anger and frustration at bugs -- but it condensed them into a 24-hour period and also threw the interesting effects of sleep-deprivation into the mix.

Part of the problem might have been the initial idea - it was mine. I went to hackathon alone, having been told that they'll group you up with someone once you get there. I had hoped to get into a group and work with them on their idea, but when the small group of loners got together and shared their ideas, none of them were too enticing. I had tentatively prepared an idea just in case I didn't get into a group, but when I mentioned it, people seemed to like it, so we went with it. The reason this is bad is that part of my problem with finishing things is that _I'm_ the one that needs to push myself to finish them. If I'm working off of someone else's idea, my hope is that their devotion to it will keep me focused as well. On top of that, I wasn't even too thrilled with my own idea - it was only intended as a fall-back.

The project went through the normal cycle of emotions I mentioned above. I started out all excited, despite my reluctance to go with my own idea (I think the excitement some of my partners had about the project reflected onto me a bit). As time went on and I became more and more tired and more and more filled with coffee and red bull, progress began to slow up and interest began to wan. 

Maybe it's just because I didn't really come in prepared in the right ways, but the hackathon "model" didn't work very well for me. I could have achieved _much_ more in 24 hours of work spread over a longer period of time. Cramming it all together seems to have only compounded the affects of boredom and frustration. If anything, the best thing for me would seem to be to take things more slowly, work less in concentrated doses, and pace myself.

I lament that I had difficulty with the hackathon. At its end I felt a little disappointed in myself, despite the fact that I hadn't really expected all that much from it. Still, the concept of a hackathon continues to be appealing, and even now I seem kind of excited at the prospect of another one. And I do plan on going to more hackathons. Hopefully I'll be better equipped to handle them in the future.
