---
layout: post
title: "I'm 20!"
---

It's my twentieth birthday (wow, typing that makes me feel old...), so here's a bunch of ramblings about math and time that might not make much sense!

I think most people agree that the older you are, the more quickly time feels like it's passing. While I'm sure life circumstances play a decent role in this (these past 2 weeks I've been off from school have been taking _forever_, while 2 weeks while I'm at school goes by much more quickly), I think part of it has to do with how we judge time. I think we judge the passage of time, at least partly, in terms of how much time we've already experienced.

Ie, to a newborn baby, who's only experienced 9 months of life, another 9 months feels like twice their entire life. But, 9 months from then, another 9 months is now only one third of their life, and so on.

So if we were to define some quantity called **perceived time**, and express it in terms of how much actual time has gone by, we might represent it as some function $f(t)$. And what we know about $f(t)$ is that how fast $f$ is changing is a function of how much actual time has gone by. Particularly, we could say that the rate that $f$ is changing is inversely proportional to how much time has gone by so far:

$$ f'(t) = k\cdot\frac{1}{t}$$

If we integrate both sides of that equation, we find that $f$ is logarithmic.

$$ \int f'(t) dt = \int \frac{k}{t}dt \implies f(t) = k\log(t) + C $$

Before you've existed at all, it's safe to say that the amount of "perceived time" you've experienced should be zero, so we have

$$ f(0) = 0 \implies k\log(0) + C = 0 \implies $$
